Content/posts/update-03-october-2020.md, before:

---
date: 2020-10-28 14:34
description: An update on what happened in the SwiftWasm ecosystem during the second half of October 2020.
---
# What's new in SwiftWasm #3

## Examples and guides

[@hassan-shahbazi](https://github.com/hassan-shahbazi) wrote [a 3 part
guide](https://medium.com/@h.shahbazi/the-power-of-swift-web-assembly-part-1-fdfa4e9134ee) about
his experience when integrating SwiftWasm apps within Go apps through [Wasmer](https://wasmer.io/).
He also published [example code accompanying the
articles](https://github.com/hassan-shahbazi/swiftwasm-go) on GitHub. It's a great introduction
to SwiftWasm that doesn't assume much prior knowledge, and could be useful if you'd like to
integrate binaries produced by SwiftWasm in any host application.

## Developer tools

[@kateinoigakukun](https://github.com/kateinoigakukun) published [a pure Swift implementation of a
transformer for Wasm binaries](https://github.com/swiftwasm/WasmTransformer). This resolves
[the issue with `i64` to `BigInt` incompatibility in Safari](https://github.com/swiftwasm/JavaScriptKit/issues/97),
as we can now [integrate an appropriate transformation](https://github.com/swiftwasm/carton/pull/131)
into our build pipeline in `carton`. The `WasmTransformer` library is still at an early stage, but
it shows that Swift is suitable for low-level code just as well as C/C++ or Rust.

## Libraries

### Tokamak

[@Cosmo](https://github.com/Cosmo) pointed out that SwiftUI apps should change almost the whole
palette when switching between color schemes. As he discovered when working on his
[OpenSwiftUI](https://github.com/Cosmo/OpenSwiftUI/) and [SwiftUIEmbedded](https://github.com/Cosmo/SwiftUIEmbedded)
projects, the implementation of the `Color` type is much more subtle than we originally anticipated.
This is now [tracked in the Tokamak repository](https://github.com/TokamakUI/Tokamak/issues/290) and
will help us a lot in our goal to track the SwiftUI behavior as closely as possible.

## Upstream PRs

### Swift Driver

[@owenv](https://github.com/owenv) merged [a PR to the Swift Driver
project](https://github.com/apple/swift-driver/pull/315) implementing WebAssembly toolchain
support. This mirrors our existing [C++ implementation in the legacy
driver](https://github.com/swiftwasm/swift/blob/swiftwasm/lib/Driver/WebAssemblyToolChains.cpp), and
it's great that the new parts of the Swift compiler rewritten in Swift are going to support
WebAssembly too. While Swift Driver in that enabled in any toolchain by default, we're definitely
going to enable it at some point in the future as soon Swift Driver seems to be stable enough for
us.

Commit message:

Add "carton" and "GitHub Actions" subsections

Content/posts/update-03-october-2020.md, after:

---
date: 2020-10-28 14:34
description: An update on what happened in the SwiftWasm ecosystem during the second half of October 2020.
---
# What's new in SwiftWasm #3

## Examples and guides

[@hassan-shahbazi](https://github.com/hassan-shahbazi) wrote [a 3 part
guide](https://medium.com/@h.shahbazi/the-power-of-swift-web-assembly-part-1-fdfa4e9134ee) about
his experience when integrating SwiftWasm apps within Go apps through [Wasmer](https://wasmer.io/).
He also published [example code accompanying the
articles](https://github.com/hassan-shahbazi/swiftwasm-go) on GitHub. It's a great introduction
to SwiftWasm that doesn't assume much prior knowledge, and could be useful if you'd like to
integrate binaries produced by SwiftWasm in any host application.

## Developer tools

### WasmTransformer

[@kateinoigakukun](https://github.com/kateinoigakukun) published [a pure Swift implementation of a
transformer for Wasm binaries](https://github.com/swiftwasm/WasmTransformer). This resolves
[the issue with `i64` to `BigInt` incompatibility in Safari](https://github.com/swiftwasm/JavaScriptKit/issues/97),
as we can now [integrate an appropriate transformation](https://github.com/swiftwasm/carton/pull/131)
into our build pipeline in `carton`. The `WasmTransformer` library is still at an early stage, but
it shows that Swift is suitable for low-level code just as well as C/C++ or Rust.

### `carton`

In addition to the WasmTransfomer integration mentioned above, `carton test` now [passes
the `--enable-test-discovery` flag to `swift test` by default](https://github.com/swiftwasm/carton/pull/130),
which means that you no longer need to maintain `LinuxMain.swift` and `XCTestManifests.swift` files
in your test suites.

A `Dockerfile` [was added to the `carton` repository](https://github.com/swiftwasm/carton/pull/136),
and you can now run `carton` in a Docker container, which also has the toolchain and other
dependencies preinstalled. You can pull the Docker image with a simple command:

```
docker pull ghcr.io/swiftwasm/carton:latest
```

### GitHub Actions

Thanks to `carton` becoming available as a Docker image, it can now be used in
our [`swiftwasm-action`](https://github.com/swiftwasm/swiftwasm-action), which previously only
contained the plain SwiftWasm toolchain without any additional tools. This action now
invokes `carton test` by default on a given repository during a GitHub Actions run, but you can
customize it and call any other command. For example, you could run `carton bundle` with `swiftwasm-action`,
and then use the [`peaceiris/actions-gh-pages`](https://github.com/peaceiris/actions-gh-pages) step
to deploy the resulting bundle to [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/).

## Libraries

### Tokamak

[@Cosmo](https://github.com/Cosmo) pointed out that SwiftUI apps should change almost the whole
palette when switching between color schemes. As he discovered when working on his
[OpenSwiftUI](https://github.com/Cosmo/OpenSwiftUI/) and [SwiftUIEmbedded](https://github.com/Cosmo/SwiftUIEmbedded)
projects, the implementation of the `Color` type is much more subtle than we originally anticipated.
This is now [tracked in the Tokamak repository](https://github.com/TokamakUI/Tokamak/issues/290) and
will help us a lot in our goal to track the SwiftUI behavior as closely as possible.

## Upstream PRs

### Swift Driver

[@owenv](https://github.com/owenv) merged [a PR to the Swift Driver
project](https://github.com/apple/swift-driver/pull/315) implementing WebAssembly toolchain
support. This mirrors our existing [C++ implementation in the legacy
driver](https://github.com/swiftwasm/swift/blob/swiftwasm/lib/Driver/WebAssemblyToolChains.cpp), and
it's great that the new parts of the Swift compiler rewritten in Swift are going to support
WebAssembly too. While Swift Driver in that enabled in any toolchain by default, we're definitely
going to enable it at some point in the future as soon Swift Driver seems to be stable enough for
us.
